Document the enum changes in RFC 2195 (#879)
rust-lang/reference: src/type-layout.md

in the union is the primitive representation version of the enum with all fields
removed ("the tag") and the remaining fields are the fields of that variant.

> Note: This representation is unchanged if the tag is given its own member in
> the union, should that make manipulation more clear for you (although to
> follow the C++ standard the tag member should be wrapped in a `struct`).

```rust
// This enum has the same layout as ...
#[repr(u8)]
enum MyEnum {
    A(u32),
    B(f32, u64),
    C { x: u32, y: u8 },
    D,
 }

// ... this union.
#[repr(C)]
union MyEnumRepr {
    A: MyVariantA,
    B: MyVariantB,
    C: MyVariantC,
    D: MyVariantD,
}

// This is the discriminant enum.
#[repr(u8)]
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
enum MyEnumDiscriminant { A, B, C, D }

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Clone, Copy)]
struct MyVariantA(MyEnumDiscriminant, u32);

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Clone, Copy)]
struct MyVariantB(MyEnumDiscriminant, f32, u64);

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Clone, Copy)]
struct MyVariantC { tag: MyEnumDiscriminant, x: u32, y: u8 }

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Clone, Copy)]
struct MyVariantD(MyEnumDiscriminant);
```

> Note: `union`s with non-`Copy` fields are unstable, see [55149].

> Combining the `repr(C)` and a primitive representation is only defined for enums
> with fields. The primitive representation modifies the `repr(C)` by changing the

Reviewer: Yes, much better. :) Some wording suggestions:
```suggestion
For enums with fields, it is also possible to combining `repr(C)` and a primitive representation.
This modifies the `repr(C)` by changing the
```
Also it would be nice to make "the `repr(C)`" in the 2nd line a link to the relevant section.

And finally, is it possible to summarize the difference between this and "normal" primitive reps in a sentence? Something like "union-of-structs vs struct-of-tag-and-unions"?

<div class="warning">

Warning: There are crucial differences between an `enum` in the C language and
Rust's [field-less enums] with this representation. An `enum` in C is
mostly a `typedef` plus some named constants; in other words, an object of an
`enum` type can hold any integer value. For example, this is often used for
bitflags in `C`. In contrast, Rust’s [field-less enums] can only legally hold
the discrimnant values, everything else is [undefined behavior]. Therefore,
using a field-less enum in FFI to model a C `enum` is often wrong.

</div>

#### \#[repr(C)] Enums With Fields

The representation of a `repr(C)` enum with fields is a `repr(C)` struct with
two fields, also called a "tagged union" in C:

- a `repr(C)` version of the enum with all fields removed ("the tag")
- a `repr(C)` union of `repr(C)` structs for the fields of each variant that had
  them ("the payload")

> > Note: due to the representation of `repr(C)` structs and unions, if a variant

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: Due to the representation of `repr(C)` structs and unions, if a variant
```

> has a single field there is no difference between putting that field directly
> in the union or wrapping it in a struct; any system which wishes to manipulate
> such an `enum`'s representation may therefore use whichever form is more

> > convenient/consistent for them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> convenient or consistent for them.
```

    payload: MyEnumFields,
}

// This is the discriminant enum.
#[repr(C)]
enum MyEnumDiscriminant { A, B, C, D }

// This is the variant union.
#[repr(C)]
union MyEnumFields {
   A: MyAFields,
   B: MyBFields,
   C: MyCFields,
   D: MyDFields,
}

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
struct MyAFields(u32);

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
struct MyBFields(f32, u64);

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
struct MyCFields { x: u32, y: u8 }

// This struct could be omitted (it is a zero-sized type), and it must be in
// C/C++ headers.
#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
struct MyDFields;
```

> Note: `union`s with non-`Copy` fields are unstable, see [55149].

### Primitive representations

The *primitive representations* are the representations with the same names as
the primitive integer types. That is: `u8`, `u16`, `u32`, `u64`, `u128`,
`usize`, `i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64`, `i128`, and `isize`.

Primitive representations can only be applied to enumerations and have
different behavior whether the enum has fields or no fields. It is an error
for [zero-variant enumerations] to have a primitive representation. Combining
two primitive representations together is an error.

> <span id="c-primitive-representation">Combining the `repr(C)`

Reviewer 2: I think this span can be removed if the link has been removed.

Author: Good catch, I had completely forgotten it

and a primitive representation is only defined for enums with fields. The
primitive representation modifies the `repr(C)` by changing the representation
of the discriminant enum to have the representation of the chosen primitive
representation. So, if you chose the `u8` representation, then the discriminant
enum would have a size and alignment of 1 byte.</span>

> Note: Primitive representations are primarily intended for Rust code that
> wants to interoperate with the idioms of preexisting C/C++ codebases. If you
> have control over both the Rust and C code, such as using C as FFI glue
> between Rust and some third language, then you should use a
> [primitive representation](#primitive-representation-of-enums-with-fields)
> instead.

#### Primitive Representation of Field-less Enums

> For [field-less enums], they set the size and alignment to be the same as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For [field-less enums], primitive representations set the size and alignment to be the same as
```

the primitive type of the same name. For example, a field-less enum with
a `u8` representation can only have discriminants between 0 and 255 inclusive.

#### Primitive Representation of Enums With Fields

> The representation of a `repr(int)` enum is a `repr(C)` union of `repr(C)`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The representation of a primitive representation enum is a `repr(C)` union of `repr(C)`
```

`repr(int)` isn't ever defined or used elsewhere. I realize the RFC used it as a shorthand for "primitive representation", and "primitive representation" is wordy, but I think it can be confusing when seen in isolation.

structs for each variant with a field. The first field of each struct in the

> union is a `repr(int)` version of the enum with all fields removed ("the tag")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
union is the primitive representation version of the enum with all fields removed ("the tag")
```

and the remaining fields are the fields of that variant.

> > Note: this representation is unchanged if the tag is given its own member in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: This representation is unchanged if the tag is given its own member in
```

> > the union, should that make manipulation more clear for you (although in C++,
> > to follow The Exact Word Of The Standard the tag member should be wrapped in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> the union, should that make manipulation more clear for you (although to
> follow the C++ standard the tag member should be wrapped in
```

Rust's [field-less enums] with this representation. An `enum` in C is
mostly a `typedef` plus some named constants; in other words, an object of an
`enum` type can hold any integer value. For example, this is often used for
bitflags in `C`. In contrast, Rust’s [field-less enums] can only legally hold
the discrimnant values, everything else is [undefined behavior]. Therefore,
using a field-less enum in FFI to model a C `enum` is often wrong.

</div>

#### \#[repr(C)] Enums With Fields

The representation of a `repr(C)` enum with fields is a `repr(C)` struct with
two fields, also called a "tagged union" in C:

- a `repr(C)` version of the enum with all fields removed ("the tag")
- a `repr(C)` union of `repr(C)` structs for the fields of each variant that had
  them ("the payload")

> Note: Due to the representation of `repr(C)` structs and unions, if a variant
> has a single field there is no difference between putting that field directly
> in the union or wrapping it in a struct; any system which wishes to manipulate
> such an `enum`'s representation may therefore use whichever form is more
> convenient or consistent for them.

```rust

> // This Enum has the same layout as ...

Reviewer: This seems to use the term "layout" for what is called "representation" above.

Author: No you're right, `representation` is used every where in those paragraphs, I'll change it.

Warning: There are crucial differences between an `enum` in the C language and
Rust's [field-less enums] with this representation. An `enum` in C is
mostly a `typedef` plus some named constants; in other words, an object of an
`enum` type can hold any integer value. For example, this is often used for
bitflags in `C`. In contrast, Rust’s [field-less enums] can only legally hold
the discrimnant values, everything else is [undefined behavior]. Therefore,
using a field-less enum in FFI to model a C `enum` is often wrong.

</div>

#### \#[repr(C)] Enums With Fields

The representation of a `repr(C)` enum with fields is a `repr(C)` struct with
two fields, also called a "tagged union" in C:

- a `repr(C)` version of the enum with all fields removed ("the tag")
- a `repr(C)` union of `repr(C)` structs for the fields of each variant that had
  them ("the payload")

> Note: Due to the representation of `repr(C)` structs and unions, if a variant
> has a single field there is no difference between putting that field directly
> in the union or wrapping it in a struct; any system which wishes to manipulate
> such an `enum`'s representation may therefore use whichever form is more

> > convenient or consistent for them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> convenient or consistent for them.
```

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
struct MyCFields { x: u32, y: u8 }

// This struct could be omitted (it is a zero-sized type), and it must be in
// C/C++ headers.
#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
struct MyDFields;
```

> Note: `union`s with non-`Copy` fields are unstable, see [55149].

### Primitive representations

The *primitive representations* are the representations with the same names as
the primitive integer types. That is: `u8`, `u16`, `u32`, `u64`, `u128`,
`usize`, `i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64`, `i128`, and `isize`.

Primitive representations can only be applied to enumerations and have
different behavior whether the enum has fields or no fields. It is an error
for [zero-variant enumerations] to have a primitive representation. Combining
two primitive representations together is an error.

> Note: Primitive representations are primarily intended for Rust code that
> wants to interoperate with the idioms of preexisting C/C++ codebases. If you
> have control over both the Rust and C code, such as using C as FFI glue
> between Rust and some third language, then you should use a
> [primitive representation](#primitive-representation-of-enums-with-fields)

> > instead.

Reviewer 2: I'm a little unclear here.  "instead" of what?  `repr(C)`?

Author: I'm not sure this whole note is useful. I could shorten it to:

> Note: Primitive representations are primarily intended for Rust code that wants to interoperate with the idioms of preexisting C/C++ codebases.

Author: I used the above wording in the "Fix nits 2" commit

Reviewer 2: Reading it again, I'm a little unclear, since there are multiple forms.  In this case, is it referring to `repr(C, Int)` or `repr(Int)`?  AIUI:

* `repr(C, Int)` is useful for C/C++ code that uses a struct with an explicitly-sized tag and payload (which is probably more common)
* `repr(Int)` is useful for C/C++ code that uses a union with an explicitly-sized tag in each struct, and can be more space-efficient than `repr(C, Int), but less common for pre-existing C code?
* `repr(C)` is useful for C/C++ code that uses a struct with a **C-enum tag** and payload? And that tag size is implementation-defined, and "best guess", so probably harder to get correct? That is, you really need to know which C compiler, platform, and C flags are being used?

Is that roughly correct?

Author: I would say you are correct. I don't have much experience with this but the hobby projects I did used `repr(C, int)` to ensure maximal compatibility, which coincides with what you said. Would you like me to properly write in the document ?

Reviewer 2: Hm.  How about removing the note altogether for now?  This feels like it would be more useful in a guide on using FFI, and I don't want to dive too deep on it here. The reference has generally shied away from including information on how something is supposed to be used, as that tends more toward guide material.

Author: I removed it.

For enums with fields, it is also possible to combine `repr(C)` and a
primitive representation (e.g., `repr(C, u8)`). This modifies the [`repr(C)`] by
changing the representation of the discriminant enum to the chosen primitive
instead. So, if you chose the `u8` representation, then the discriminant enum
would have a size and alignment of 1 byte.

The discriminant enum from the example [earlier][`repr(C)`] then becomes:

```rust
#[repr(C, u8)] // `u8` was added
enum MyEnum {
    A(u32),
    B(f32, u64),
    C { x: u32, y: u8 },
    D,
 }

// ...

#[repr(u8)] // So `u8` is used here instead of `C`
enum MyEnumDiscriminant { A, B, C, D }

// ...
```

For example, with a `repr(C, u8)` enum it is not possible to have 257 unique
discriminants ("tags") whereas the same enum with only a `repr(C)` attribute
will compile without any problems.

Using a primitive representation in addition to `repr(C)` can change the size of
an enum from the `repr(C)` form:

```rust
#[repr(C)]
enum EnumC {
    Variant0(u8),
    Variant1,
}

#[repr(C, u8)]
enum Enum8 {
    Variant0(u8),
    Variant1,
}

#[repr(C, u16)]
enum Enum16 {
    Variant0(u8),
    Variant1,
}

> // The C representation, with the size of the discriminant unspecified

Reviewer 2: I thought the discriminant was specified — as the size of a C `enum` of the target platform's C ABI?  Then there is 1 byte for the u8 value, plus padding.  It might also be worth indicating what platform this example is for, since the value could be different for other platforms?  Or maybe just scratch all that and say "the size is platform-dependent"?

Author: I'll go with "the size is platform dependant"

> // One byte for the discriminant and one byte for the value in Enum8::Variant0

Reviewer 2: This doesn't explain why two bytes would be equal to 8.

Also, it says `Enum8::Variant0`, but I would think it should be `EnumC::Variant0`?

Author: That's a copy-paste mistake 😓

Primitive representations can only be applied to enumerations and have
different behavior whether the enum has fields or no fields. It is an error
for [zero-variant enumerations] to have a primitive representation. Combining
two primitive representations together is an error.

<span id="c-primitive-representation">Combining the `repr(C)`

> and a primitive representation is only defined for enums with fields. The

Reviewer: This sentence makes it sound like the discussion should be in
```
#### Primitive Representation of Enums With Fields
```
That subsection really has two parts: with and without `repr(C)`.

Author: I moved the paragraph to the end of the `Primitive Representation of Enums With Fields`, is it better ?

> Note: `union`s with non-`Copy` fields are unstable, see [55149].

> For enums with fields, it is also possible to combining `repr(C)` and a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For enums with fields, it is also possible to combine `repr(C)` and a
```

> primitive representation. This modifies the [`repr(C)`] by changing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
primitive representation (e.g., `repr(C, i32)`). This modifies the [`repr(C)`] by changing the
```

representation of the discriminant enum to have the representation of the chosen

> primitive representation. So, if you chose the `u8` representation, then the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
representation of the discriminant enum to have the representation of the chosen
primitive. So, if you chose the `u8` representation, then the
```
At least I think that's what you mean? "the representation of the chose primitive representation" does make sense, I think.

Reviewer: This strange wording is still in the latest version I think.

> Note: `union`s with non-`Copy` fields are unstable, see [55149].

#### Combining primitive representations of enums with fields and \#[repr(C)]

For enums with fields, it is also possible to combine `repr(C)` and a
primitive representation (e.g., `repr(C, u8)`). This modifies the [`repr(C)`] by

> changing the representation of the discriminant enum to have the representation

Reviewer: Here: "changing the representation [...] to have the representation of".  But representations do not have representations.

Author: I updated the wording and added a little context to the example below, is it better this way ?

Reviewer: Yes looks good. :)
